---
title: "How does it feel — to be a girl among all those men? (The Queen's Gambit Obsession)"
pubDate: 2026-03-01
description: "The dramatic story of a genious child who became a grossmaster."
coverImage: "/beth2.jpg"
category: pages-frames
location: ""
tags: [chess, queen's gambit, netflix series]
---

Dear Beth Harmon,

Last year was so difficult, different, and unexpected for the whole of humanity. A lot of bad things happened, the world changed dramatically and it will never be the same again. But I can say that you were the best thing that happened to us this last year. You didn’t care about our small world. You just were there to show us how to be fighters and how to be more, how to reach for our goals, how to escape the depression, you have learned us how to deal with loneliness and that alone doesn’t always mean forgotten. You have taught us not to be afraid of being outnumbered. A lion walks alone while the sheep flock together. But not everyone was able to understand the depth of your character. You need an apology for all that we cannot see in you, for all that we haven’t learned from you, for you, shining so bright in our ordinary grey world that you dazzle everything around you and blinded our eyes that we couldn't give you the attention you deserved.

I want to apologize to you for our minds being so limited to understand your world. You have only 64 squares in front of you but your, yes, your chessboard is bigger and more complicated than our entire world. We are so focused on our own topical issues, our small talks, and our daily routines that we can’t see you — you, the invention of 21st century, the real survival, the prodigy kind, the girl among all those men who live to win.



I want to apologize for every time we didn’t see the real you, for every time we underestimated you. I want to apologize on the behalf of Boby Fischer who said that there were no top women players in his era because “they’re just not so smart” and “they should strictly stay home.” I am apologizing also on the behalf of Garry Kasparov who once said that chess “does not fit women properly”. I am sorry for these genius players and champions for being so blind and so limited in their understanding of the world. I am sorry for their brilliant minds which are not capable to realize what a woman can do. I am sorry that they so easily cut the capabilities and the values of 49.6% of the world population just because they are in the remaining part. Mr. Shaibel said the first time when you wanted to play chess with him that “girls don’t play chess.” But after he saw you, saw the real you, he became the one and the only man who truly loved you and believed in you..from the begging to the end. Because you deserved it.



I also want to apologize to all of us, women, who sometimes say that we are fighting to be equal to men. Two decades ago women started their path to equality and their search for respect, understanding, and appreciation, and thanks to them we are here now — we can study, we can participate in competitions, solve mathematical problems, play chess, work the same jobs as men, vote, decide how to build our own future freely. We have the duty to continue walking on this path and to purchase more for ourselves and the next generations. Even more. We have to fight not to be equal to men, not even to be better, but to be the best — to be winners, to be grandmasters of this world like you are. Beth, you said that “I would say it is much easier to play chess without the burden of Adam’s apple”. And that’s a real inspiration. Actually, it doesn't matter and it shouldn’t matter — if you have Adam’s apple, if you wear a dress instead of trousers, if you are good looking instead of having the typical geek’s appearance. But through all these epochs the society has taught us this and only this — men are more just because they are men and that’s it — no logic, no explanation. That’s the patriarchal world we are surrounded by for decades. But you stay there and just rise — among them, among the prejudices, breaking the stereotypes. Because they are nonsense. Because all it matters is you and only you. No race, no gender, no limitations for the human brain. Our only limitations are those we set up in our minds or permit others to set up for us. You taught us to break them and free our minds to reach the endless possibilities the world can offer only if we start believing in ourselves.



I want to apologize on behalf of all the people who blame you — who judge your addictions and your behavior. They just have forgotten about their own moments of absolute darkness. We all have these sad, depressing, and hopeless moments and periods, and yes, maybe not all of us use pills and alcohol, but we have other drugs — our feelings. Should we be punished because of them? Should we be disrespected for feeling great emotions? No. We should be honored for having hearts in one cold material consumer word. We should be honored for fighting with our weaknesses and becoming stronger and greater. We must have felt what it is to die that we may appreciate the enjoyments of life. Only those who have felt how deep can be a human’s tragedy can really see what real happiness is, only those who have fallen in the depths of the deepest abyss can rise to the heights of the most significant human achievements.



I want to apologize that I focus on you being a woman not on you being astonishing, smart, outstanding, and actually the greatest in the world. “It’s mostly about me being a girl. It shouldn’t be that important.” Yes, it shouldn’t but it actually is. The reason is the limited vision of our society. Yes, the main reason to be a celebrity in your fictional world is not you being a girl but you being a child prodigy, you playing the Sicilian perfectly, you being a grandmaster and you being the world’s best chess player at 22. But you are a woman. And you don’t mind to be surrounded by men, you are brave, you are a fighter, you are a warrior. And your mind is stronger than any strong male body and attitude. You are the strongest woman I have ever known. You are an idol. You are an example that success is possible even if you are a woman and that shouldn’t matter. Because you are just a human as all of us. And you are a leader who manifests that there are strong women, fighters, warriors, who can change the world with their minds.



I want to apologize for talking to you as you are real. But that’s only because I know you are. I have been you through all my life. But unfortunately, not exactly you. I have never been so generous, so marvelous, so brave, so strong. I just have been a girl among all those men. And I have always fought to be more, more than the men I competed with, more that it was needed for me, many more from the ordinary, more than myself. Maybe I will always ask myself “Am I good enough?”. Maybe in some moments of our lives, we are all the little Beth staying in the basement, asking with piercing fear in her eyes, a little pain, and a lot of excitement, “Am I good enough now”? Are we good enough for the next step, for the next competition, for the unpredictable and challenging life out there, are we good enough to face all the obstacles, survive them, outgrowth them and be the winners? We can live with the hope that someday, the grown-up and ready Beth in us will tell to herself again with a little insecurity “I don’t know if I am good enough” and there will be no answer, only actions that will speak louder than words. And we will be. Better. The best. The queens. Because Beth Harmon, you, as a confident and astounding white queen who always wins, taught us that we have to be queens and we are queens. Because the queen is not on the board to protect the king, she is there to win the game. Your queen’s gambit is a sacrifice for all of us — to teach us never to sacrifice the queens in us. Only to win with them.



Beth Harmon, the one thing we know for sure about you, is that you love to win. And yes, winning is everything. Life is a game and we are here to win it. Every pawn can be a queen if she managed to fight and to survive. We are all pawns needed to cross the board of life and rise as queens. Because life is our game. And we will win it.